[Best Practices] Add best practices article and enhance the Scripting Fundamentals (#277)
OfficeDev/office-scripts-docs: docs/develop/best-practices.md

ms.date: 05/10/2021
localization_priority: Normal
---

# Best practices in Office Scripts

There are some patterns you can follow in your Office Scripts to help ensure they run successfully. These should help you avoid common pitfalls as you start automating your Excel workflow.

## Check if the object exists before using it

Scripts often rely on a certain worksheet or table being present in the workbook. However, they might get renamed or removed between script runs. By checking if those tables or worksheets exist before calling methods on them, you can make sure the script doesn't end abruptly.

The following sample code checks if the "Index" worksheet is present in the workbook. If the worksheet is present, the script gets a range and proceeds. If it isn't present, the script logs a custom error message.

```TypeScript
// Make sure the "Index" worksheet exists before using it.
let indexSheet = workbook.getWorksheet('Index');
if (indexSheet) {
  let range = indexSheet.getRange("A1");
  // Continue using the range...
} else {
  console.log("Index sheet not found.");
}
```

> You can also use the TypeScript `?` operator to check if the object exists before calling a method. This can make your code more streamlined if you don't need to do anything special when the object doesn't exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the TypeScript `?` operator to check if the object exists before calling a method. This can make your code more streamlined if you don't need to do anything special when the object doesn't exist.
```

The following scripts shows how to use the `throw` statement in our table checking example.

```TypeScript
function main(workbook: ExcelScript.Workbook) {
  // These tables must be in the workbook for the script.
  const TargetTableName = 'Table1';
  const SourceTableName = 'Table2';

  // Get the table objects.
  let targetTable = workbook.getTable(TargetTableName);
  let sourceTable = workbook.getTable(SourceTableName);

  // Check if the tables are there.
  if (!targetTable || !sourceTable) {
    // Immediately end the script with an error.
    throw `Required tables missing - Check that both the source (${TargetTableName}) and target (${SourceTableName}) tables are present before running the script.`;
  }
  
```

## How to use try...catch to handle errors

The [`try...catch`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/try...catch) technique is a way to detect if an API call failed and handle that error in your script. It may be important to check the return value of an API to verify that it was completed successfully.

Consider the following snippet that performs a large data update on a range.

```TypeScript
range.setValues(someLargeValues);
```

> If `someLargeValues` is larger than Excel for the web can handle, the `setValues()` call fails. The script then also fails with a [runtime error](../testing/troubleshooting.md#runtime-errors). You may wish to handle this condition in your code. You could either customize the error message (the first of the following two snippets) or break up the update into smaller units (the second snippet). `try...catch` lets you handle this in the script, rather than showing the default error to whoever is using your script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `someLargeValues` is larger than Excel for the web can handle, the `setValues()` call fails. The script then also fails with a [runtime error](../testing/troubleshooting.md#runtime-errors). You may wish to handle this condition in your code. You could either customize the error message or break up the update into smaller units, as shown in the following snippets. `try...catch` lets you handle this in the script, rather than showing the default error to whoever is using your script.
```

let indexSheet = workbook.getWorksheet('Index');
if (indexSheet) {
  let range = indexSheet.getRange("A1");
  // Continue using the range...
} else {
  console.log("Index sheet not found.");
}
```

You can also use the TypeScript `?` operator to check if the object exists before calling a method. This can make your code more streamlined if you don't need to do anything special if the object doesn't exist.

```TypeScript
// The ? ensures that the delete() API is only called if the object exists.
workbook.getWorksheet('Index')?.delete();
```

## Check everything at the beginning of the script

Make sure everything is in the workbook before working on the data. Using the previous pattern, you can check to see if all your worksheets, tables, shapes, and other objects are present and match your expectations. Doing this before any data is written ensures your script doesn't leave the workbook in a partial state.

The following script requires two tables named "Table1" and "Table2" to be present. The script checks if they're there and ends with the `return` statement and an appropriate message if they are not.

```TypeScript
function main(workbook: ExcelScript.Workbook) {

>   // Tables that should be in the workbook for the script to work:

Author: Good call. I'll change the phrasing so it works better as a normal sentence (like the other comments).

However, if your script is running as part of a Power Automate flow, you may want to stop the flow from continuing. A `throw` statement stops the script and tells the flow to stop as well.

The following scripts shows how to use the `throw` statement in our table checking example.

```TypeScript
function main(workbook: ExcelScript.Workbook) {

  // Tables that should be in the workbook for the script to work:
  const TargetTableName = 'Table1';
  const SourceTableName = 'Table2';

  // Get the table objects.
  let targetTable = workbook.getTable(TargetTableName);
  let sourceTable = workbook.getTable(SourceTableName);

  // Check if the tables are there.
  if (!targetTable || !sourceTable) {
    // Immediately end the script with an error.
    throw `Required tables missing - Check that both the source (${TargetTableName}) and target (${SourceTableName}) tables are present before running the script.`;
  }
  
```

> ## How to use try..catch to handle errors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How to use try...catch to handle errors
```

The [`try...catch`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/try...catch) technique is a way to detect if an API call failed and handle that error in your script. It may be important to check the return value of an API to verify that it was completed successfully.

> Consider the following snippet that performs a large data update on a range:

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty sure sentences preceding code samples always end with a period. Our editor can confirm. 
```suggestion
Consider the following snippet that performs a large data update on a range.
```

```TypeScript
range.setValues(someLargeValues);
```

> If `someLargeValues` is larger than Excel for the web can handle, the `setValues()` call fails. The script then also fails with a runtime error. You may wish to handle this condition in your code. You could either customize the error message (the first of the following two snippets) or break up the update into smaller units (the second snippet). `try...catch` lets you handle this in the script, rather than letting the error surface.

Reviewer 2: Could we link to "runtime error" here or explain what it is?

> If `someLargeValues` is larger than Excel for the web can handle, the `setValues()` call fails. The script then also fails with a runtime error. You may wish to handle this condition in your code. You could either customize the error message (the first of the following two snippets) or break up the update into smaller units (the second snippet). `try...catch` lets you handle this in the script, rather than letting the error surface.

Reviewer 2: End user may not be the right term here, but consider clarifying how the error surfaces. 
```suggestion
If `someLargeValues` is larger than Excel for the web can handle, the `setValues()` call fails. The script then also fails with a runtime error. You may wish to handle this condition in your code. You could either customize the error message (the first of the following two snippets) or break up the update into smaller units (the second snippet). `try...catch` lets you handle this error in the script, rather than letting the error surface to your end user.
```

```TypeScript
try {
    range.setValues(someLargeValues);
} catch (error) {
    console.log(`The script failed to update the values at location ${range.getAddress()}. Please inspect and run again.`);
    console.log(error);
    return; // End the script (assuming this is in the main function).
}
```

```TypeScript
try {
    range.setValues(someLargeValues);
} catch (error) {
    console.log(`The script failed to update the values at location ${range.getAddress()}. Trying a different approach.`);
    handleUpdatesInSmallerChunks(someLargeValues);
}

// Continue...
}
```

> [!NOTE]

> > Using `try..catch` inside or around a loop slows down your script. See [Avoid using `try...catch` blocks](web-client-performance.md#avoid-using-trycatch-blocks-in-or-around-loops) for more performance information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Using `try...catch` inside or around a loop slows down your script. See [Avoid using `try...catch` blocks](web-client-performance.md#avoid-using-trycatch-blocks-in-or-around-loops) for more performance information.
```

## See also

- [Troubleshooting Office Scripts](../testing/troubleshooting.md)
- [Troubleshooting information for Power Automate with Office Scripts](../testing/power-automate-troubleshooting.md)

> - [Platform Limits with Office Scripts](../testing/platform-limits.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Platform limits with Office Scripts](../testing/platform-limits.md)
```
